Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
developer express, become a UI
superhero with dev express controls
and libraries. Deliver elegant.net solutions
that address customer needs today
by leveraging your existing knowledge,
you can build next generation
touch enabled solutions for tomorrow,
you can download your free
30 day trial@dxdothanselminutes.com. That's dx.hanselminutes.com
From hanselminutes.com. It's Hansel minutes.
Our weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence Ryan announcing show
number 562. In this episode,
Scott talks with us air
force veteran, Jerome Hardaway about
vets who code. This is
Scott Hanselman. This is another
episode of Hansel minutes today.
We're talking with Jerome Hardaway
from veterans who code vets,
who code.io. How are you,
sir? Hey, how are you
doing? Thank you for having
me to, yeah, absolutely. So
you were in the air
force, right? Yes, sir. I
was the United States air force
security forces and a part
of the Phoenix Raven program.
And how long were you
in? I was in for
about five years and 10
months. And it was that
something that where you had
a career and then you
joined the air force and
then you left or did
you go straight in from
school? I went straight in
from a high school. I
was initially going to go
to college to turn around
the side of it. I
wanted to go use the
air force and see what
type of opportunities are there
from where they're from me.
Most of my family they've
served. So I wanted to
do my part before I
went on to the rest
of my life as well.
Is that a, is that
really a common path for
folks to go in right
out of high school? Yes.
There's a enlisted, enlisted, which
is, you know, most people
either go to high, go
right out of high school
or some with some college,
but to be an officer
it's not like how it
was in world war one
and world war two, where
you can, where they could
like make you an officer.
Even if you were enlisted,
you have to have a
degree for that to be,
to become a military company.
Great officer. And when folks
come out, so like, I'm,
I'm just, I'm imagining you're
in high school, your high
school, you consider your different
options. You go into the
air force, you do five,
six years, and then do
people stay in for the
rest of their lives or
do they come out and
say, all right, now I
will go into college with
my GI bill money for
50% of the military. Now
that answer is they get
out the military and try
to go to school or
try to pursue other things
right now the military and
like marriage has liked the,
or has liked the same
divorce rate as we like
to say about 50%. Yeah.
About 50% of all people
get divorced about 50% of
all people that enter the
military get out of their
first time. So interesting. Okay.
And how long does the
term first term King any
go in or from four
to six years? They you're
usually you're considered a first
term veteran if you are
first. Yeah. First time veteran,
I guess be the best
way to say, is there
any branch for only four
years? So that's usually what
a, they that's how the
military does. It is four
years and the eight year
Mark, then the 10 year
Mark is those all like
big deals in the military
then 20 years. And you
could retire after 20. So
when you come out and
it's like, all right, I'm
going to go get a
job. Let's say, then you
put on your suit and
you start doing interviews. When
people look at your resume
and they see, they see
that you were in the
military, what does the hiring
manager think? Do they think
this person had a very
important job for five years
or do they think that's,
did they do? They imply
that that's a gap and
that's not valuable time first
and foremost, the first thing
is you'd be amazed how
many veterans don't even own
a suit when they get
out of the military. The
transitional process of getting out
of the military to the
becoming a member is civilian
society is extremely broken. We
have what is called a
taps broke program, but outside
of the most extensive part
of it is prepping to
get you out of the
military system and not prepping
you for your new life.
On average, it's about two
to three days. I've seen
some, I've heard they're getting
better, but I know when
I was in years ago,
it was one day. And
one of our veterans told
me that like it lasted
maybe four days at his
base. So the transition assistance
programs are, you know, there's
not a lot of money
or time invested in it.
And usually it's somebody who,
you know, they served 20
years in the military and
then after they got out,
they took over there, the
transition assistance program as a
civilian. So a lot of
times you're learning about transition,
transitioning out of the military
for somebody who, you know,
was a lifer in the
military and then their, their
transition into the civilian sector
was taking a government job
with the military. You know,
it's like their second job
that they've ever had. So
that's the first hurdle that
we usually see as veterans.
So then we encounter second
hurdle is most people, even
though you see how big
the military is, when you
think of that and correlation
to the United States, about 1%
of all people have served
and in our country. So
as a result, most people
then when it come to
hiring managers, they have no
idea how to read a
military, a resume. So the
second big hurdle is doing
resume interview prep for veterans,
just so we can show
those trans transferrable skills to
a civilian hiring managers and
hiring partners. So outside of
those two big hurdles, that
leaves a lot of room
for misinterpretation by hiring managers,
by civilians, a lot of
people in general. And that's
why you see most veterans.
They try to go back
in a government service, but
in another format, because those
are like the only jobs
or careers that really understand
them. Or if they join
the military, they automatically, you
know, they understand they understand
what you've gone through. So
it's not by choice. Yeah.
You know, I'm thinking, I'm
trying to think about different
kinds of analogies to put
it. There's so many different
ways to look at it.
You're in another, in another
world and another very insular
dimension. You know what I
mean? I would recommend, I
will compare it to the
bubble effect that people are
talking about these days. Like
the military is its own
little bubble. W when I
was in, I had no
idea. I had no idea
about the recession until I
is 13th of 2009. And
that's the day, that's the
Friday that I was out
of service. And then I
was getting, getting into the
civilian world and I just
happened to be watching news
and afternoon. I heard something
about the recession and my
uterus session had been going
on since 2007. I had
been literally a God. Yes,
I'm two years behind the
rest of the world what's
going on. So I'm like,
that is how the military
is. It's almost like a
world within his own self.
The ecosystem is really small.
It's really tight. A lot
of the things that you're
doing are already provided for
you, especially if you're a
young air, a young troop,
young veteran, a lot of
things you don't have to
leave the base or an
installation for. And if you're
in a career like I
was, it had a lot
of high deployment rate. You
didn't really have to, no,
you really don't have that
time to be that outside
of things that really require
your job, paying attention to
you. You didn't have the
time to pay attention to
stuff like CNN. My wife
today makes fun of me
because ever since I was
like 1920, I was watching
CNN for global affairs. And
like, it's just happened like
that. So this bubble, I'm
thinking of all the other
bubbles that are out there,
that someone could be in,
you could be in academia
and then come out of
academia. You can be in
the military and come out.
You could be in the
nonprofit sector. Or like you
said, working for the government.
It's very different than the
private sector. And it sounds
like your people are coming
out with a kind of
a, Hey good luck. You
know, here's some, here's some
pamphlets, good luck. There's literally
what we're seeing is getting
better, but it's not getting
better as fast as you
know, when you look at
the numbers, 250,000. No, I
believe it's 25,000. I'm sorry.
25,000 troops are leaving the
service every year. So that's
25,000 new people. They are
needing transition assistance, trying to
get jobs, trying to learn
skills every like every year.
It's pretty harboring numbers when
you think of it. So
I am assume that there
are veterans that are in
tech. They were veterans who
are coding as part of
their jobs, but you said
you were in security services.
So I assume that other
than checking email and Skyping
home, there's not a lot
of time to be like
keeping up on what's going
on in the tech industry.
Yes and no. My last
job was a B dot
controller, which has really take
heavy in the military. Yeah.
Basically it was in charge.
I was in charge of
a lot of security devices
as well as equipment to
make sure that everybody could
communicate effectively with, in case
of missions. Like we were
outside of the person who's
in charge of the entire
flight or a team, which
is around 52 people who
was there called the flight
Sergeant and the flight commander.
Who's the officer in charge.
The, the BDR controller is
beneath them and they are
those. So I was basically
three IC and making sure
that everything was, that our
team was taking care of
the installation correctly. So how
are you keeping up on
what's going on in there?
Like the world of tech,
you just reading blogs and
reading the news. And, and
Well, for me, I wasn't
merged. I was, I did
a lot of Google. I
was a Google. And what
happened, w I had to
take bug bite me around
2006. I had a roommate
in Korea who they were
in tech. So they actually
worked on servers on the
installation in South Korea. So, so
picking his brain every once
in a while, seeing what
he was doing really had
me intrigued. So that's how
part of it started. The
other part of it was
basically like, like you said,
when I came out, that's
what I started doing was
devouring. Every book, he's a
literature that I could think
of around 2010, especially when
it came to sequel SQL,
that was like my first
like serious, serious job. So
you had, then@whatpointdidyouseeanadvertisementforcode.org? It was
around 2010, 2010. The same
time. Yeah. That's when I
saw that advertisement. And that's
when I started devouring everything
about code. I said, I
worked as a TWIC analyst
for an apartment home security
services or whatever it's called.
I don't even remember the,
these days everybody's name is
changing. And part of that
was doing on SQL as
their analyst and handling people's
security clearances, sort of get
on like waterways and things
of that nature. So that
was what my first technically
technical job. Cause I, you
know, it was a lot
of SQL involved, a lot
of search queries, things of
that nature. Then as I
moved on, took a break
cause my, she ended up
getting really ill. So I
came home from my last
duty station to come back
to my hometown, Memphis to
help her. And after about
a year, I was trying
to get back into the
field, started working in a
nonprofit and helping that nonprofit
with his tech and digital
marketing. And then before I
realized it, I had my
all crazy situation. It fell
in my lap to where
I would end up having
to start that Sukkot. Do
you think that your, your
story is a typical one
that, that everyone who is
a vet should get on
code Academy and code.org, or
don't you think that there's
people who have that inner
fire, that they can self-learn,
you know, that autodidact where
it's like, I want to
learn this on my own,
or do you think most
people need some framework within
which they, I do not
think people need a framework
and the work, I think
people can do whatever, like
whatever works for them. Like
I heard about covid.org and
the HTML CSS on code
Academy, but then I moved
right to SQL and they
never had SQL course until
like 2015, 2016 or something
like that. And I never,
so I started using a
lot of books, a lot
of likes, a lot of
Googling self-learning and doing everything
I could learn SQL. So,
and the same with JavaScript
and PHP. So I think
veterans, you know, we have
that unique tenacity where I
think it has the misconception
is it, we have everything
handed to us where they
don't people aren't sending it.
You know, we regularly deploy
without all the tools needed
to do our job, to
do, to like pricing, you
know, price cuts, things of
that nature where the note
is trying to save money
and we're, you know, innate
problem-solvers because a you're in
a, you know, third world
country and the whole, the
whole goal is to come
back home. And one piece
for Christmas, you have to
figure out the best way
to solve problems that you
may not always have the
best tools for and what
I'm seeing. And what will
we find? The veterans that
we help live at Sukkot
is a lot of these
veterans, they have done a
lot of self study on
their own, and they're just
at a sticking point. So
yeah, there several veterans had
gone through, we were like
on average with our data,
we were about the third
resource they've used after they've
either hit sticking point or
they've expanded all of their
other resources to learn how
to code. Then they come
find us. You'd be amazed
how I'm now 70% of
the people who we set
up, they already have get
hubs. And they've already been
pushing yes. Try and learn
how to code things of
that nature. They, you know,
they're not, they're go getters.
And that's, those are the
people we look for for
vet Sukkot. We are not
community-based. We, I take the,
our partners seriously. I take
our donors very seriously and
I want to find that
best talent for us. So
that way we can focus
on finding really talented people,
who agent, they deserve this
opportunity to learn how to
program or have access to
really pull partners or really
pull resources and help them.
They just, you know what
things they're may be standing
in their way or things
like, you know, I have
a family or one, one
individual, his steps on it
is a really ill and
other individual. She was working,
she's a spouse and she's
working with her family, but
her husband's overseas. So we
find these people who are
talented, they just need help.
And then now be close
to, you know, a big
coat school city or something
like that. And we take
them and we train them
and we help them get
jobs. And we focus on
a lot of open source
technologies to get that done.
so where does open
source come in? Cause you
described basically all the things
you're using PHP and Ruby
and JavaScript and Python, is
it, was it significant that
you didn't have to go
on a register for something
and download a commercial project?
Like is opensource fundamental to
what you do in your
learning process? Yes. It's one
of the most important why
open source the open source
community is like the lifesaver
of a lot of, not
just myself or a vesicle,
but a lot of programs.
And in general, because that,
that community can make, you
know, they make the best,
some of the best products
for learning how to code
some of the, some of
our products are better than
commercial. Like we were just
on, on Twitter talking about
this earlier this morning, in
regards to how a book
is usually recommended for beginner.
Programmers is actually a horrifying
book. If you're a beginner
programmer, trying to learn JavaScript
is like, is the scariest
book ever. And we were
talking about how like, you
know, JS for kids is
a better book, or if
you had didn't want to
note school, which is free
and open source is a
great resource. And the Mozilla
tutorial, that's like amazing that,
that their tutorials are beautiful
in regards to a JavaScript.
So just, that's one of
the biggest thing about these
organizations that focus on open
source community, like the no
community, the Ruby on rails
community there, they really, if
you wanted to learn how
to program the speed at
a JavaScript's going and the
capabilities that you have with
Ruby and Ruby on rails,
those are some of the
best buy open source products
out there on the web.
And you can learn so
much from just investing time
in the product. Someone brought
up a really interesting phrase
to me recently that I
knew, but hadn't really absorbed.
And they said that we
can teach people to code,
but we're not teaching them
digital literacy. What do you
think about that? Someone said
like, well, you type in
cnn.com and you hit enter
and then a miracle happens.
And the page renders, how
deep do people have to
go? How intuitive to these
things have to be, can
you go and teach someone
node without teaching them about
IP addresses and FTP and
things like that? Or, you
know, where does it Negative?
You need to know how
to deploy an app. Like
for us, we, we teach
Capistrano. We talked to FTP
things of those nature, that
nature. But yeah, you need
to learn how to do
stuff. I would compare that
I would compare that to
how veterans are trained when
it comes to borrowing their,
I guess there's one. Now
everybody uses it. Now the
when it comes to
our, the weapon of choice
to train on the range,
you have to know that
weapon forwards and backwards. You
have to know which type
of rounds can you use
on this 5.5, six or
7.62, are you using fiber
optic Knights Knight skills? Are
we using IRR night skill?
Or if you're going to
using an iron Saigon, I
know the weight have know
all this. How many rounds
per minute, things of that
nature, you have to have
a take it apart from
together, the equivalent of true
troubleshooting it in case something
happens, The brains are wired
this way already. It's like,
okay, I need to know
all these little details. And
I have to be very,
very regimented and very focused
and, and recognize how things
are put together and take
them apart and put them
back together again. So you're
saying the military brain is
set up for this kind
of work, right? It's not,
I wouldn't say set up.
I would say that they
force you to, they ran
that knowledge. I wouldn't say
it that way, but you
get to, yeah, I was
there. So it was either
minus stuff or do pushups.
And if only do something,
maybe we need to do
code school like that more
pushups that would be, I
don't know how people for
profit schools are like that,
but I think it'd be
fun. Be fun. One of
the things that I'm, that
I'm passionate about is trying
to use, you know, the
privileges that I have to
as my friend and Juan
says to lend that privilege
to others. And I know
that you're passionate about helping
underprivileged communities. Would you plug
veterans that are coming out
into the world of coding
as, as being underprivileged? Or
does that word, how wide
does that word go for
you? I think underprivileged and
underrepresented is unrepresented a word
I I'll use for veterans.
If you think you just
look at, you have no
further look at how I'm
looking at where veterans are
in Congress, or even in
your community. A lot of,
you know, a lot of
veteran issues and veterans in
general. It's a, especially when
you get out, it's a
uphill battle because you don't
have that advantage of relationships.
All you have is your
service. And hopefully, you know,
out, you know, hopefully you
are a Marine and you
were like how my Marine
groves are. They can live
the rest of their lives,
easy peasy cause they're Marine.
So they can just say,
I'm a Marine. And it's
very, we have a joke
about how a Marine and
army ranger and a airborne
Tru all walk into a
bar. And we know that
because, you know, they told
us the first two minutes
and it's like, and the
civilian sector, that would be
your CrossFitter and your vegan.
So those guys, they tend
to be okay, but it
still is very underrepresented, like
a community in the civilian
sector. Mm. So do you
think that the, you know,
the, the way that we're
moving in the state of
tech inclusion is getting better
and this will help, you
know, veterans that we're, now
that we're aware that, you
know, I'll use the word
diversity in a, in a
broad sense that different kinds
of people from different kinds
of backgrounds make for a
better team that, you know,
we should be considering veterans
for per our projects, because
it's going to make for
a better. Yes. And now
it's really difficult for me
to answer that question because
I see multiple different communities.
And there are some communities
that are white just on
the ball. When you go
to New York or you go
to San Francisco or Atlanta,
those communities, they are, you
know, they're serious, they're taking
tech inclusion, be it minorities,
women, veterans very serious. And
you see some communities that
they're not taking it as
serious, but you also have
to realize about the money
generators and things of that
nature in those communities, for
instance, and my hometown, because
health care and transportation are
the main two financial generators
in that city, outside of
tourism. No one really cares
unless you're going to do
like a Java or asp.net
type of program, things of
that nature. And when it
comes to inclusion, a lot
of things when it comes
to inclusion or falling through
the cracks, and they just
weren't as effective where I'm
like, hi, Jess came from
a Facebook on veterans veteran's
day, week. And they were
just so on the ball
when it comes to tech
inclusion and particularly in a
veteran asset, you know, I
was like, I don't even
know why I need to
be here. And while you
guys invited me here to
talk about this stuff, like,
you know, yeah. Like they
had a guy from NASA
they're like, they just hired
this for, he's been there
for like a month prior
to like the event. And
he was his job for
NASA. He was air force
and worked at NASA. His
job was putting satellites in
the frequent sky. And that's
what he did. Like, ah,
I put things in space
and that's what he does
for Facebook. He puts things
in space. I'm like, wow,
I totally like you. Don't
like Facebook is so huge.
And there's so many different
moving parts of it that
you don't even think of
jobs like that. And Hey,
you can work at Facebook.
It put things in space.
So they're hiring people from
NASA. So you ever want
to move to California and
you're into NASA. You should
look at Facebook. So I'm
pretty sure that there's going
to be some NASA scientists
that hits me up now
and be like, yo, stop
poaching. Our people That, that
just makes me feel though,
that, that having different people
from different places is useful.
Like having people with degrees,
having people, without degrees, having
scientists that can go to
space, you know, who knows
all kinds of flavors of
people. Yes, you're absolutely right.
That's I think the inclusion
and the diversity of having
people, having different people of
thoughts, ethnicities backgrounds, and that's
what makes a great community
and a great product. Those
are the two things that
people really want. I think
that's one of the big
things that civilian community doesn't
do well versus the military
community, because we're all unified
on one course or inside
the military. It's not our
military bubble. A lot of
that stuff, especially when you're
overseas, a lot of the
more bureaucratic or first world
problems that, you know, just
parts people. We don't stress
about splitting that comes. And
we start getting more attuned
to that, more empathetic about
that as we come back
home and we start reintegrating
back society. But like, because
of all my deployments and
things of that nature, I
remember when I first came
home, it took years for
me to start understanding like
what was a big deal
for certain things. When it
came to civilian side, my
wife, she would tell you
she would come home. And
she would tell me how
bad her day was. And
my idea was, did anyone
die? And then you'd be
like, well, no. And then
I turn back around and
get back to Kodak. And
I was like, am I
in my world? No loss
of limb. I'll also eyesight.
And I'll also live. Everything's
good. So, but I've changed.
I've gotten older and wiser
and smarter. Cause I'm trying
to stay married. I'm pretty
sure. But like put, did
you die is probably not
what my wife wants to
know, wants to hear. One
thing that makes me, that
makes me think of though,
is when, when someone gives
an order, when there's a
chain of command and someone
gives an order, is there
any debate? Is there any
like, well, here's how I
was. Another way I could
think we could do that.
You know, because that's very
common in the coding environment,
right? Yes. That's Very like,
yeah, you can do that.
A lot of people cause
a lot of people's ideas
of what, how the military
has operated cause of like
mash and things of that
nature where you're just like,
Oh, you just follow orders.
So just the shows that
show only basic training. I
know you can question orders
if you have good reason
why we actually is against
the, is against the UCM
UCM J to follow on
lawful orders. So for instance,
if you get an order
and you are on a
question and this is unlawful,
you don't have to follow
that order. And I've seen
people fight that all the
way up to the Pentagon
and you can always suggest
better, different ways as well.
And that's what makes great
leadership. They understand the military
use. They understand that there's
not, there's more than one
way to solve a problem
and create solutions. So they're
not against younger, more junior
troops understanding, understanding this. But
I, from my own personal
experience, I never forget when
I was at, we were
leaving camp Buku Iraq. And
I was, we were all
waiting for the, the NCO
CO's to come up with
a plan for how we're
getting all our bags off
this convoy and into the,
these conexes. So they could
be shipped home. And there
were six of them and
they were just still debating
Baden debating. And I just
got up and I walked
to the Conex to convoy.
You've got 'em on an
18 Wheeler, start taking bags,
taking them off. They looked
at me and then they
went back to talking, well,
15 minutes later, another airman
came up to me and
they were like, well, I'm
going to help you because
you seem to be the
only one that's doing something.
30 minutes later, I had
an entire fire team with
me. And I had actually
realized that I was taking
a leadership decision, a role
in getting our gear ready
to get, go home while
the tech sergeants or in
support. So things like that.
I mean, I, in people's
ideas of what would have
happened on TV, I would
have gotten regaled. It either
gotten chewed out. I'm like,
no, that didn't happen at
all. People started helping because
I was the only person
taking action. And I was
like, well, you know what?
I'm started building. And then
I'm start solving and working
on the problem. Then I'll
figure it out as I
go, which is very much
like how programming is. And
that's what most people do.
Let me build something. Then
as I get a problem,
let me research it, let
me think of better. You
know, the first program is
not a beautiful piece of
art. That's just one of
the things that we tell
our troops has never delete
your first program because it's
going to be crappy, but
you are going to learn
to appreciate that five, 10
years down the road. You're
not talking, you know, you're
not thinking about epics and
user stories. And you know,
all of these things that
are TDD, like no one
cares about test driven development.
When we first learned how
to code, as only as
you get more senior, more
into like how, like I'll
have to say more into
like the professional grade of
programming. You know, you have
to think about what we
say, the three users, you
know, you have to think
about a user. That's your
boss, the user that's going
to come after you eventually
and look at this code
and the user who's the
consumer. And the second user,
you have to treat, the
users can come and look
at your code, like a
psychopath that knows where you
live. So that's where you
start thinking about that stuff.
But outside of that, you're
just doing stuff and solving
problems and putting out fires
as it goes along. I'm
pretty sure Facebook was like
that when it was getting
made in some kid's dorm
and Twitter was like that.
And we are in no,
the Twitter story didn't get
off the ground the first
two times and four, it
became what it is today.
So that's how the military
is wrong. You're, you're there
to solve a problem and
to solve a problem with
the least amount of pain
as possible, or at least
not of time, like, you
know, that's what we want
to do. Cause in the
end, we all just want
to get home and go
back to like playing video
games, just like normal people.
I just like civilians. There
were no different. We want
to know. We want to
play our video games, eat
barbecue, sleep in. Well, not
sleeping. I'm not gonna lie
that I hate sleeping. So
I guess to be in
trouble So people, people can
learn about vets who code@vetswhocode.io.
It's been around since 2014
and it's a nonprofit so
they can donate it's tax
deductible. Yes, sir. It is
fantastic. Well, thank you so
much. Jerome Hardaway for talking
with me today. Thank you.
Thank you for having me.
This has been another episode
of Hanselminutes and we'll see
you again next week. .